.. _sec-scheduler:

Scheduler
---------

The scheduler is the component of the blackboard system that actually executes
the knowledge sources – but first, it *schedules* them, that is, it decides the
order in which knowledge sources waiting in the agenda get executed. This order
is rescheduled after every execution of a knowledge source, since the conditions
determining the order may have changed, or new knowledge sources may be present
in the agenda that are more urgent.

The following factors influence the order of execution of knowledge sources:

* Knowledge sources have a property called *attentional priority*.  Knowledge
  sources with higher priority get executed before knowledge sources with lower
  priority. This priority can be set by the knowledge source itself, by other
  knowledge sources or from outside the system. The ``BlackboardMonitor``
  provides a method for setting focus on a knowledge source (increasing its
  priority), along with the option to propagate this higher priority down along
  the dependency chain of this knowledge source. The dependency chain is
  determined by the event bindings.

* Knowledge sources must implement a method ``canExecute``, that returns whether
  or not the knowledge source can execute at this moment, and which is called by
  the scheduler if the knowledge source is first on the scheduling list. If it
  cannot execute, the knowledge source can decide whether to remain in the
  agenda or be removed from it.

* Knowledge sources define a maximum invocation frequency, that cannot be
  exceeded. It is a *maximum* frequency, because knowledge sources get not
  necessarily executed periodically, since they are triggered by events, but not
  by timers. The scheduler checks whether the last execution time was long
  enough ago before considering the knowledge source for execution. Until then,
  it remains in the agenda.

This listing shows the relevant parts of the interface with respect to
influencing the scheduling::

    class BlackboardMonitor
        methods
            focusOn( ks, propagateDown )
            resetFocus()

    class AbstractKS
        properties
            invocationMaxFrequency_Hz;
        methods (Abstract)
            canExecute() 
            execute()
        methods
            focus()
            unfocus()

.. vim: filetype=rst spell:
